Title: Integrating holomorphic sectional curvatures
Author: Gunnar Þór Magnússon
CSS: style.css
Date: 2022-12-19

# Integrating holomorphic sectional curvatures

[Gunnar Þór Magnússon](mailto:gunnar@magnusson.io)

## Abstract

We calculate the $L^2$-norm of the holomorphic sectional curvature of a K\"ahler metric by representation-theoretic means.
This yields a new proof that the holomorphic sectional curvature determines the whole curvature tensor.
We then investigate what the holomorphic sectional curvature of a Hermitian metric determines.

## Introduction

Let $X$ be a complex manifold of dimension $n$ and let $h$ be a K\"ahler metric on $X$.
We denote by $R$ the curvature tensor of the Chern connection of $h$.
One of the main ways to simplify this complicated tensor is to consider the holomorphic sectional curvature of $h$, that is

$$
H(\xi) = R(\xi, \ov{\xi}, \xi, \ov{\xi}) / |\xi|^4
$$

for nonzero tangent fields $\xi$.
If $s$ is the scalar curvature of $h$, it is well-known that

$$
\frac{1}{\Vol S(T_{X,x})} \int_{S(T_{X,x})} H(\xi) d\sigma
= \frac{1}{\binom{n+1}{2}} s,
$$

where $S(T_{X,x})$ is the unit ball in $T_{X,x}$ [[Berger]](#berger).
It is also well-known that the holomorphic sectional curvature determines the whole curvature tensor, in the sense that if $H = 0$ then $R = 0$ [[Zheng]](#zheng).

The existing proofs of these facts are by brute force calculations.
The integral over the sphere is broken up into polynomial components that are evaluated separately and summed together.
This works out in the end because of the seeming coincidence that the integrals of $|z_j|^4$ and $|z_j|^2 |z_k|^2$ over the unit sphere agree up to a factor of 2.
The proof of the determination of the curvature tensor is by clever algebraic manipulation that leaves at least myself no wiser as to why this is true at all.

In this article we propose a new route to these facts.
Our starting point is a representation-theoretic identity that is known to
quantum information theorists, namely that

$$
\frac{1}{\Vol S(V)} \int_{S(V)} (v \otimes v^*)^{\otimes d} d\sigma
= \frac{1}{\binom{n+d-1}{d}} \Pi_{d},
$$

where $V$ is an $n$-dimensional complex vector space and $\Pi_{d} : V^{\otimes d} \to V^{\otimes d}$ is the projection onto the subspace of symmetric $d$-tensors.
Berger's scalar curvature identity is an immediate consequence of this identity, and it and some routine linear algebra let us also evaluate the $L^2$ norm of the holomorphic scalar curvature and see that

$$
\frac{1}{\Vol S(T_{X,x})} \int_{S(T_{X,x})} H(\xi)^2 d\sigma
= \frac{1}{\binom{n+3}{4}} (|R|^2 + 4|r|^2 + s^2),
$$

where $r$ is the Ricci-tensor of $h$, which neatly explains why the holomorphic sectional curvature determines the whole tensor.

Slightly more bookkeeping lets us also consider the same integrals for the curvature tensors of Hermitian metrics.
There it is no longer true that the holomorphic sectional curvature determines the whole tensor, but we can say what it does determine, which turns out to be essentially the "symmetric" part of the tensor when viewed as a Hermitian form on $V^{\otimes 2} = \bigwedge^{2} V \oplus \Sym^2 V$.

## Algebraic curvature tensors

Let $V$ be a complex vector space of dimension $n$, which we think of as the
tangent space of a complex manifold at a given point.
The curvature tensor $R$ of a Hermitian metric on the manifold identifies with
a Hermitian form $q$ on $V \otimes V$, defined by

$$
R(x, \ov y, z, \ov w)
= q(x \otimes z, \ov{y \otimes w}).
$$

If the metric is K\"ahler we get an additional symmetry
$R(x, \ov y, z, \ov w) = R(z, \ov y, x, \ov w)$
(and the ones induced by conjugating).
A nice alternate reference for what we discuss here is
[[Sitaramayya]](#Sitaramayya).

We write $B(V)$ for the real vector space of Hermitian forms on $V$.
The curvature tensor of a Hermitian metric is then just a member of $B(V
\otimes V)$. We call such an element an _algebraic Hermitian curvature
tensor_, and one that satisfies the additional symmetry of a K\"ahler curvature
tensor an _algebraic K\"ahler curvature tensor_.

The decomposition $V \otimes V = \bigwedge^2 V \oplus \Sym^2 V$ is standard.
It implies that a Hermitian form on $V \otimes V$ decomposes into components

$$
q = \begin{pmatrix}
q_{\wedge^2 V} & q_{(\Sym^2V, \wedge^2 V)}
\\
q_{(\wedge^2 V, \Sym^2V)} & q_{\Sym^2 V},
\end{pmatrix}
$$

where $\ov{q}_{(\wedge^2 V, \Sym^2V)}^t = q_{(\Sym^2V, \wedge^2 V)}$.
Denote the symmetrization map by

$$
\Pi_2 : V \otimes V \to \Sym^2 V,
\quad
x \otimes y \mapsto \tfrac 12 (x \otimes y + y \otimes x).
$$

It is a surjective linear morphism that realizes the space of symmetric tensors
as a subspace of $V \otimes V$.
The usual definition of that space is as a quotient of $V \otimes V$ by the
ideal generated by $x \otimes y - y \otimes x$.
As the field $\C$ has characteristic zero these spaces are isomorphic,
so the difference between them isn't very important to us.

**Proposition.**
A tensor $R \in B(V \otimes V)$ is an algebraic K\"ahler curvature tensor
if and only if there exists an element $\hat R \in B(\Sym^2 V)$ such that $R =
\Pi_2^* \hat R$.

_Proof:_
Suppose $R \in B(V \otimes V)$ is an algebraic K\"ahler curvature tensor.
We define

$$
\hat R(x \odot z, \ov{y \odot w})
= R(x, \ov y, z, \ov w),
$$

which is well-defined because $R$ is K\"ahler, and we have $R = \Pi_2^* \hat R$.

Conversely, let $\hat R \in B(\Sym^2 V)$, and define $R = \Pi_2^* \hat R$.
Then

$$
R(x, \ov y, z, \ov w)
= \hat R(x \odot z, \ov{y \odot w})
= \hat R(z \odot x, \ov{w \odot y})
= R(z, \ov y, x, \ov w)
$$

is an algebraic K\"ahler curvature tensor.

As an aside, this proposition explains why we only ever talk about Griffits
positivity of K\"ahler metrics.
A Hermitian metric is Nakano positive if its curvature tensor is
positive-definite as a Hermitian form on $V \otimes V$.
A form that's a pullback by a morphism with nontrivial
kernel is never positive-definite.
Therefore a K\"ahler metric is never Nakano positive when $\Pi_2$ is not
injective, which happens when
$n^2 = \dim V \otimes V > \dim \Sym^2 V = \binom {n+1}2$,
that is, when $n > 1$.

There should then be a notion of positivity for K\"ahler curvature tensors that
interpolates between Griffiths positivity and Nakano positivity and is perhaps
more geometrically motivated than Griffiths positivity, where we would say that
such a tensor is positive if its Hermitian form on $\Sym^2 V$ is
positive-definite.
In light of Siu and Yau's theorem any compact K\"ahler manifold that
admits a metric so positive is just projective space, so we don't need to think
about it anymore.

## Projection formula

Our starting point involves vector-valued integration, so let's recall
some basic facts.
Let $V$ and $W$ be finite-dimensional complex vector spaces equipped with their
Lebesgue measures.
If $f : V \to W$ is a continuous function and $X \subset V$ a measurable subset
we define $\int_X f(v) d\mu(v) \in W$ to be the vector we get after picking
bases and integrating coordinate by coordinate.
If $L : W \to Z$ is a linear map then $L \int_X f(v) d\mu(v) = \int_X Lf(v)
d\mu(v)$, because that holds at every step of the definition of the integral of
a measurable function.
This implies the integral is well-defined, as it behaves correctly with respect
to a change of bases.
It also implies that if $f : V \to V$ is continuous then the trace commutes
with the integral.

Let's suppose $V$ is equipped with a Hermitian inner product $h$
and let's write $d\mu$ for the induced volume form on the unit sphere $S(V)$ in
$V$. For $v \in V$ we define $v \otimes v^*$ to be the linear map
$h^*(\ov v) v = x \mapsto h(x, \ov v) v$.
Note that if $f \in \End V$ then $f \circ v \otimes v^* = h^*(\ov v) f(v)$
and thus $\tr(f \circ v \otimes v^*) = h(fv, \ov v)$.
The following is known to quantum information theorists; see
[[Harrow]](#Harrow)
and
[[Watrous, Chapter 7]](#Watrous).

**Proposition.**
Denote by $\Pi_d : V^{\otimes d} \to V^{\otimes d}$ the projection onto $\Sym^d V$.
Then

$$
\frac{1}{\Vol S(V)}
\int_{S(V)} (v \otimes v^*)^{d} d\mu(v)
= \frac{1}{\binom{n+d-1}{d}} \Pi_d.
$$

_Proof:_
Let's denote the map defined by the integral by $L$. If $g \in \End V$ is
unitary with respect to $h$ we have $h(g x, \ov v) = h(x, \ov{g^{-1} v})$ and
$|\det g| = 1$ so the change of basis formula implies that $L g^d = g^d L$.
The map $L$ is then an interleaving operator of the representation $V^{\otimes d}$
of the unitary group.

The integral is thus a sum of multiples of the projections onto the irreducible
factors of $V^{\otimes d}$.
Note however that the integral takes values in $\Sym^d V$ because the integrand
is invariant under $S_d$, so $L = \lambda \Pi_d$ for some scalar $\lambda$.
For a unit vector $v$ we have $\tr v \otimes v^* = |v|^2 = 1$.
Taking the trace we then find that $1 = \lambda \binom{n+d-1}{d}$,
which implies the result.

## K\"ahler metrics

## Hermitian metrics

## References

### [Berger]

Marcel Berger.
_Sur les vari\'et\'es d'Einstein compactes._
**Comptes Rendus de la IIIe R\'eunion du Groupement des Math\'ematiciens d'Expression Latine (Namur, 1965)**,
pages 35--55.
Librairie Universitaire, Louvain, 1966.

### [Harrow]

Aram W. Harrow.
_[The church of the symmetric subspace](https://arxiv.org/abs/1308.6595)._
**arXiv** 1308.6595, 2013.

### [Sitaramayya]

Malladi Sitaramayya.
_[Curvature tensors in Kaehler manifolds](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1996473)._
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
**183** (341--353) 1973.

### [Watrous]

John Watrous.
_[The theory of quantum information](https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~watrous/TQI/)._
Cambridge University Press, 2018.

### [Zheng]

Fangyang Zheng.
_Complex differential geometry._
**AMS/IP Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 18**.
Amer. Math. Soc. 2000.
